- Welcome to the Huberman Lab Podcast,
where we discuss science
and science based tools
for everyday life.
[mellow music]
I'm Andrew Huberman and I'm
a Professor of Neurobiology
and Ophthalmology at
Stanford School of Medicine.
Today we're talking all about habits.
In particular,
we're going to discuss the
biology of habit formation
and the biology of how we break habits.
I think we can all appreciate
the value of having habits.
Habits organize our behavior
into more or less reflexive actions
so we don't have to think too much
about performing the various
behaviors that, for instance,
allow us to brush our teeth
or which side of bed we
roll out of in the morning.
And then of course, habits
can be more elaborate too.
We can be in the habit of exercising
at a particular time of day.
We can be in the habit
of eating certain foods.
We can be in the habit of
saying or saying certain things.
But of course,
there are many habits
that don't serve us well,
or that perhaps even
undermine our immediate
and long term health goals
and psychological goals.
And even some habits
that can really undermine
our overall life goals.
So today we're going to talk
about making, meaning forming,
and breaking, meaning
stopping, various habits.
There's a lot of information
out there about habits.
You'll find this in the popular sphere.
There are books, there are
articles, there are workshops,
and so forth.
However, lesser known is that
there's a whole neuroscience
of habit formation and habit breaking.
And there's a whole field
of psychology devoted
to understanding habit
formation and habit breaking.
And within those scientific literatures,
I think there are some real gems that,
at least to my knowledge,
we haven't paid too much attention to
in the popular sphere.
So today,
we're going to talk about the
biology of habit formation
and habit breaking.
I'm going to boil these down
to some very explicit steps
that anyone can use.
My reasoning for doing
that is, first of all,
it's the end of 2021.
Many people are thinking
about new year's resolutions.
They're thinking about leaving
some things behind from 2021
and previous.
And acquiring some new behaviors,
taking on some new challenges,
and trying to bring new
things to their lives.
But regardless of when
you're listening to this,
the programs that I'll outline
are grounded in the neuroscience
and biology of habit formation.
And they map very well
to what the psychologists have described,
in terms of habit formation and breaking.
So today you're going to
learn a lot of science,
you're also going to come
away with some practical tools
and I'm certain that regardless
of your present state
or goals, there'll be
something of value to you.
Before we begin, I'd like to emphasize
that this podcast is
separate from my teaching
and research roles at Stanford.
It is, however, part
of my desire and effort
to bring zero cost to consumer information
about science and science related tools
to the general public.
In keeping with that theme,
I'd like to thank the
sponsors of today's podcast.
Our first sponsor is Athletic Greens.
Athletic greens is in all-in-one vitamin,
mineral, probiotic drink.
I started taking Athletic
Greens way back in 2012,
so I'm delighted that they're
sponsoring the podcast.
The reason I started
taking Athletic Greens
and the reason I still
take Athletic Greens is
that because of the
ingredients it contains,
I know that I'm covering
all of my foundation needs
for vitamins, minerals, and probiotics.
There is a wealth of knowledge
now pointing to the fact
that the so-called
gut-brain axis is important
for our brain health,
for our metabolic health,
for our hormone health,
for our immune system,
so the probiotics, vitamins,
and minerals really support that system.
And many of the other things it contains
generally support our health,
in terms of neural
system, meaning the brain,
the spinal cord, et cetera.
Basically, Athletic Greens
has all the things I need,
nothing I don't, and by
taking it once or twice a day,
I always feel better
and I know that I'm covering all my bases.
If you'd like to try Athletic Greens,
you can go to athleticgreens.com/huberman
to claim a special offer.
They'll give you five free travel packs
that make it very easy
to mix up Athletic Greens
while you're on the road, in the car,
or on the plane, et cetera.
Plus, a year's supply of vitamin D3, K2.
Again, go to athleticgreens.com/huberman
to claim this special offer
of the five free travel packs
plus a year's supply of vitamin D3 and K2.
Today's podcast is also
brought to us by InsideTracker.
InsideTracker is a
personalized nutrition platform
that analyzes data from your blood and DNA
to help you better understand your body
and help you reach your health goals.
I've long been a believer in
getting regular blood-work done
for the simple reason
that most of the factors
that impact your immediate
and long-term health
can only be analyzed from
a quality blood test.
And nowadays, with the
advent of modern DNA tests,
you can also get insight
into your particular needs
for your genetic type.
Now, a major issue with
a lot of blood tests
and DNA tests out there is
you get the numbers back,
you get a lot of information back,
but you don't know what to
do with that information.
InsideTracker makes that very easy.
They have a personalized platform
where you get your numbers
and it points to specific
things that you can do,
in terms of behavioral protocols,
meaning things you perhaps
should do more of or less of,
nutritional protocols,
things that you perhaps should
ingest more of or less of,
and various things that you might consider
for more elaborate, directed approaches
to adjusting the numbers in
your blood and DNA profiles.
Another feature of InsideTracker,
is that it has what's
called "The Inner Age Test".
This test allows you to see
what your biological age is
and compare that to
your chronological age.
Of course,
your biological age is the
one that you can control
and that's the one that's really important
to your immediate and long-term health.
If you'd like to try InsideTracker,
you can go to insidetracker.com/huberman
to get 25% off any of
InsideTracker's plans.
That's insidetracker.com/huberman
to get 25% off.
Today's episode is also
brought to us by Helix Sleep.
Helix Sleep makes mattresses and pillows
that I truly believe
are the best out there.
I've been sleeping on a Helix mattress
for about a year now
and it's the best sleep I've ever had.
One thing that makes Helix
mattresses really unique
is that they are tailored
to your unique sleep needs.
You can go to their
website, you take a quiz,
it only takes about two minutes,
and it will match your body
type and sleep preferences
to a particular mattress.
So, it will ask you questions such as,
"Do you sleep on your side,
you back, or your stomach?"
"Do you tend to run hot
or cold during the night?"
Maybe you don't know.
You answer those questions
and it matches you
to the mattress that's right for you.
For me, that turned out to be
the Dusk Mattress, D U S K.
I wanted a mattress that
wasn't too firm, not too soft.
Anyway, I matched to the Dusk.
I've been sleeping on a Dusk Mattress,
as I mentioned before.
It's been the best experience for me.
My sleep is so improved.
So if you're interested
in upgrading your mattress
go to helixsleep.com/huberman,
take their two-minute sleep quiz,
and they'll match you to a
customized mattress for you.
And you'll get up to $200
off all mattress orders
and two free pillows.
Again, go to helixsleep.com/huberman,
take their quiz, match to the
mattress that's right for you,
and if you decide to purchase it,
you'll get up to $200
off all mattress orders
and two free pillows.
They have a ten-year warrantee
and if you want to try
it out, you can do that
for 100 nights risk-free.
They'll even pick the mattress up for you
if you don't love it,
but I'm pretty confident that you will.
Again, helixsleep.com/huberman
is where you'll find the
Helix mattress for you.
Let's talk about habits.
And anytime we're talking about habits,
that means our nervous
system learns something.
Now, many people think that
habits are just like reflexes,
but pure reflexes are things
like the eye blink reflex.
You know, something comes towards your eye
and you don't want it to get
in your eye, you'll blink.
Or if you happen to
step on a sharp object,
or get too close to
something that's too hot,
you'll reflexively move away.
Those aren't habits.
Those are what we call
hard-wired reflexes.
Habits are things that our
nervous system learned,
but not always consciously.
Sometimes we develop habits
that we're not even aware of
until they become a problem
or maybe they serve us well.
Who knows?
But the fact of the matter is
that habits are a big part of who we are.
What we do habitually makes up
much of what we do entirely.
In fact, it's estimated
that up to 70% of our
waking behavior is made up
of habitual behavior.
So, you can imagine that
there's a lot of biology,
meaning cells and hormones and
neural pathways, et cetera,
that are going to support
development of those habits.
So if habits are largely, learned,
consciously or unconsciously,
we have to ask ourselves,
what is learning?
Well, learning is neuroplasticity.
Neuroplasticity is simply the process
by which our nervous system changes
in response to experience.
We have to ask, what changes?
Well, what changes are the
connections between neurons.
Neurons are just nerve cells.
They communicate with one
another by electricity
and by sending chemical
signals to one another
that inspire the next
neuron and the next neuron
to either electrically active or not.
But at the end of the day,
neuroplasticity is about
forming new neural circuits,
new pathways by which certain
habits are likely to occur,
and other ones are less likely to occur.
So, we've got habits.
We have that habits are learned,
we have that learning
involves neuroplasticity,
and that neuroplasticity involves changes
in the connections between
neurons, nerve cells.
Okay, so that describes
habits through the lens
of neuroscience and biology,
but as many of you are well aware,
there are popular books about habits
and there's a whole psychological
literature about habits,
and those two areas point
to some very interesting aspects of habits
that I think are worth mentioning.
First of all is this notion
of immediate goal-based habits
versus identity-based habits.
Immediate goal-based habits
are going to be habits
that are designed to bring
you a specific outcome
as you do them,
so each and every time you do them.
So for instance,
it might be that you want to
develop a habit of getting,
you know, 60 minutes of
zone II cardio each day,
or perhaps 3-4 times per week,
as we head into the new year.
I've talked before on the
podcast about the fact
that the scientific literature
and the health literature really points
to the incredibly positive effects
of getting 150 minutes to
180 minutes per week minimum
of what's called zone II cardio.
Zone II cardio is basically
any cardiovascular exercise
that gets you moving,
and your heart pumping,
and breathing,
but not so hard that you
can't hold a conversation,
and so that kind of puts
you at the threshold
of just being just able
to have a conversation
that's a little bit strained,
but if you were to exercise
a little bit harder,
you know, run a little
bit faster, et cetera,
you wouldn't be able to
talk while you did it.
There's a lot of literature
that points to that
as a healthy practice.
So maybe you're somebody that wants
to get more of zone II
cardio, for instance.
That would be an
immediate goal-based habit
if your goal is to get that cardio,
maybe 4 times a week.
Every time you do it you
check off a little box
and you say, "Okay, I did
it." You met the goal.
That is different than
so-called identity-based habits
where there's a larger,
over-arching theme to the habit,
where you're trying to
become, quote unquote,
"a fit person".
Or you're somebody who
wants to be an athlete
or something of that sort.
It's where you start to attach
some sort of larger picture
about yourself or what it
means for you to do that habit
where there's both the
immediate goal, right?
Complete the exercise,
complete the session,
or whatever it is, check off that box.
But that you're linking it
to some sort of larger goal.
Now, why am I making this distinction?
I mean, first of all,
I'm not the one to first
make this distinction.
Others have made the
distinction between identity
versus immediate
goal-based habit formation.
But the reason I'm
making the distinction is
that pretty soon in our discussion today
we are going to talk about dopamine,
a molecule that's associated
with motivation and reward,
that we make in our brain,
and how different schedules
of dopamine release
predict where we will
stick to a habit or not.
And in particular,
whether or not we will be able
to form that habit quickly
or not.
Now, this is absolutely
critical to understand
for the following reason.
Another thing that you'll hear
out there in the literature
is that it takes 21 days to form a habit.
Some people say 18, some people say 21,
some people say 30 days,
some people say 60 days.
So which one is it?
Does it depend on the habit
that one is trying to form?
Or does it depend on the person
that's trying to form the habit?
Well, it turns out
that there's excellent
peer-reviewed data on this.
There's a study published in 2010,
first author Lally, L A L L Y.
This study found that,
for the same habit to be formed,
it can take anywhere from 18 days
to as many as 254 days
for different individuals
to form that habit.
The reason I bring this up,
is that I always get asked,
"Is it true that it takes
21 days to form a habit?"
"Is it true that your nervous
system changes in six days"
"when you're doing something repeatedly?"
And the answer is, as I mentioned before,
it's highly variable.
What I didn't tell you actually,
is what specific habit
they were looking at
in that Lally study.
And it's interesting that
the specific behavior
was a health-related behavior.
That's pretty relevant
to our discussion here,
on the podcast.
Which was taking walks after dinner.
There's actually a really nice literature
showing that walks after a meal
can speed glucose clearance
from the blood stream,
can be beneficial for
not just weight loss,
but cardiovascular health, et cetera.
So a walk after dinner seems
pretty straight-forward, right?
Well, in order to form that habit,
it took some people 18 days
and other people 254 days.
How did they know when
they formed the habit?
Well, they were doing
it about 85% of the time
and they also reported not having to spend
that much mental effort in
order to get into to the mode
of taking a walk after dinner.
So, for those of you listening,
some of you might be thinking,
"I can't believe that it would
take certain people 254 days"
"to get into that habit."
As I said, people are highly variable
and if you can't form one habit easily,
it doesn't mean that you can't
form other habits easily.
The mystery of why certain people
can form certain habits
more easily than others?
Probably has something to
do with how people manage
what's called limbic friction.
Now, limbic friction is not a
term that you're going to find
in the formal neurobiological literature
or even some of the
psychological literature.
It's, frankly, a term that I coined
to encompass a number of different pieces
of the psychology and
neuroscience literature.
Limbic friction is a short-hand way
that I use to describe
the strain that's required
in order to overcome one of
two states within your body.
One state is one of anxiousness,
where you're really anxious
and therefore you can't
calm down, you can't relax,
and therefore you can't engage
in some particular activity
or thought pattern that you would like.
The other state is one in
which you're feeling too tired
or lazy or not motivated.
Both of those states, feeling too alert
and too calm, if you will,
relate to the function
of the so-called autonomic nervous system,
a set of neurons and hormones
and chemicals in your brain
and body that act as sort of a see-saw.
You're either alert or calm.
You're either asleep or stressed.
Those two states are not
compatible with one another.
You've probably heard of "wired and tired"
but that's really once
you've been very stressed
for a long time, to the
point where you're exhausted.
What does the autonomic
nervous system have to do
with any of this?
Well, limbic friction is a phrase
that can be used to
describe how much effort,
how much activation energy you need
in order to engage in
a particular behavior.
So, using this Lally study as an example,
some people would eat
dinner, and then say,
"Oh, that's right, I've been
trying to develop the habit"
"of taking a walk after dinner."
"So, let's get up and go."
Other people will feel like,
"I just don't want to do it today."
They're going to feel
too much limbic friction
and that limbic friction
could arrive, again,
from one of two sources.
It could be because they
are too tired to do it
or it could be because they're too anxious
and distracted in order to do it.
So, this is a key distinction.
A lot of habit formation has to do
with being in the right state of mind
and being able to control
your state of body and mind.
So as we march forward,
what you're going to
find is that this phrase
or this term, limbic friction,
is going to be a useful metric
or a way for you to touch in with yourself
and address whether or not you are likely
to be able to form a certain habit easily
or whether or not it's going
to be very challenging.
And I'm going to teach you a way
to measure your degree of limbic friction.
That is, how much activation
energy it will take
in order for you to execute a new habit.
And I'm going to teach you
how to measure your limbic friction
and activation energy for how likely it is
that you're going to be
able to break a habit
that you don't want to have.
The other key concept for us to address
that's really mainly found in the books
and articles out there about habits,
is this notions of what
I call linchpin habits.
Linchpin habits are certain habits
that make a lot of other
habits easier to execute.
Now, the sorts of linchpin habits
that I'm referring to are
always going to be things
that you enjoy doing.
I'll just give you an
example from my life.
I happen to like exercise.
Not all forms of exercise,
but I happen to like resistance training
and I happen to like running.
So I'm personally in the habit
of getting cardiovascular
exercise 3 or 4 times per week.
Maybe 30-60 minutes per session.
And I'm in the habit of
doing resistance training 3
or 4 times per week,
typically also for about 45
to 60 minutes per session.
Now, I enjoy those,
and for reasons that I'll
get into a little bit later,
I enjoy those activities
typically early in the day
because of the neurochemistry
and the various types
of hormones, et cetera,
that are associates with
performing those activities.
But I really place those
activities under the umbrella
of what I call linchpin habits.
Why? Because those
particular habits are easy
to execute because I enjoy them.
But they also make a lot of
other habits easier to execute.
Things like being alert for work,
things like making sure
that I get good sleep the night before,
things like hydration,
things like making sure
that I eat the foods
that are better for me than
some of the other foods
that maybe I would more
reflexively reach to
if I weren't doing that training.
So certain habits act as linchpins,
meaning that they shift
a lot of other things.
They can control and
bias the likelihood that,
in this case you or me,
will perform other habits
that are harder to access,
that we have less of an affinity for.
So again,
there's three concepts that
we need to include here.
We've got identity-based
versus goal-based habits.
We've got the concept that
typically different habits
take different periods of time to adopt,
depending on the person and the habit.
And that there are these,
what I call linchpin habits.
Certain habits that make other
habits easier to execute.
And those linchpin habits
always, always, always are
things that we enjoy doing.
So our goal throughout this
episode is for you to identify
which habits are easy for you to perform,
which ones are hard for you to perform,
and which habits you want to break.
If you want to grab a pen
and paper, you can do that.
Or if you want to dictate
some of that into your phone,
you can.
But right now, actually,
if you just want to think
about these concepts,
you can always go back later,
I'll be sure to spell
out a very specific way
that you can chart out a map
towards forming particular habits
and breaking particular habits later on.
What I'd like us to do at this point is
to take that concepts of limbic friction
and for you to ask yourself
what habits you perform on a daily basis,
and these could be things as basic
as brushing your teeth before breakfast,
or brushing your teeth after breakfast.
It could be, for instance,
that you get exercise
or you get it at a particular time of day,
or even that you take a
particular route to work, right?
We are very habitual
and we tend to do things
more or less over and over
in the same way, unless
we intervene in ourselves.
That's just the way that we are wired.
So now I'd like you to shift
to thinking about a
particular aspect of habits
and that's habit strength.
Now, you all have different habits.
You probably brush your teeth
at a particular time of day,
you probably exercise at
particular times of week,
you probably go to the refrigerator
in a very habitual way.
We are incredibly habitual organisms.
Unless we intervene in our habits,
they tend to carry out the
same way that they always have
once they've formed.
So you can do this exercise now,
you don't have to write this
down if you don't want to,
but you certainly are welcome.
We're going to evaluate
what's called habit strength.
That's not a concept that I created.
Habit strength is something
that you will find in the
psychological literature.
Habit strength is measured
by two main criteria.
The first, is how
context-dependent a give habit is.
So, context dependence is,
if you go from one
environment to the next,
do you tend to do the same thing,
in the same way, at the same time of day?
So, for instance,
brushing your teeth firs
thing in the morning.
Maybe some of you do
that before breakfast,
maybe some of you do that later,
maybe some of you, like me,
don't even eat breakfast.
But when I travel, I tend
to brush my teeth at more
or less the same time of day
relative to when I wake up
as I do when I'm at home.
So it's context independent.
So it's a very strong habit, right?
There are certain behaviors,
like perhaps what you eat,
or, you know, perhaps how you dress,
that are context independent,
that you might perform
one way in one context,
and another way in another context.
The other aspect of habit strength is
how much limbic friction is required
to perform that habit on a regular basis.
This is extremely important
because if you are in the
process of building habits
and consolidating those habits,
then it's probably going to
take more limbic friction
to execute those habits.
What do I mean by that?
Well, let's say you set out to get,
let's say 45 minutes of zone
II cardio exercise every day,
5 or maybe even 7 days a week.
Well, if at first you're highly motivated,
limbic friction might be pretty low.
Limbic friction is how much top-down,
meaning from your fore-brain
to your limbic system,
the part of you brain that
generates autonomic responses,
how much limbic friction,
meaning conscious over-ride
of your state is required
in order to engage in
that particular behavior.
So, if you're feeling particularly tired
and you don't want to get out of bed,
and you don't want to go out
and do your zone II cardio,
then there's a high
degree of limbic friction.
It takes, some people
think of it as motivation,
but motivation is a
bit of a vague concept,
whereas limbic friction involves
specific neural circuits
and you can think of it in a
more or less quantitative way.
You can think of that
your body is very tired,
so it's going to take more limbic friction
in order to get into action.
Right?
You're going to have to
overcome more limbic friction,
excuse me.
Whereas if you're very, very alert,
there's less limbic friction
because you're moving toward something
that's action oriented.
However, the inverse is also true.
Let's say that you are
trying to get into the habit,
or you're in the early
stages of forming a habit
to meditate regularly.
That's a pretty quiescent
or calming activity,
so if you're somebody
who comes home from work
and you're very anxious and
you have a lot of work to do
and you have to deal
with a bunch of things,
there's a lot of limbic
friction to overcome
in order to get into that calm state.
So these two aspects, context dependence,
whether or not you're like to do the thing
regardless of where you are.
Right? On travel, at home, on vacation,
with people around, not
people around, et cetera.
And how much limbic friction is required
to execute that habit,
will tell you whether or
not that habit is deeply
or just shallowly embedded
within your nervous system.
The goal of any habit that we want to form
is to get into what's called automaticity.
Automaticity is fancy language
for the neural circuits can
perform it automatically,
and that's the ultimate place to be.
All right, if you have all these goals
and things that you want to
be doing on a regular basis,
you'd love for them to be habitual
because it takes less
mental and physical effort,
less limbic friction,
in order to execute those.
And so much of what's out there,
again in the popular
psychology literature,
in books that you'll find
on the bookstore shelf
and on Amazon, and in the airports,
are about how to get
from that mode of high
degree of limbic friction
to automaticity.
And they offer a number of different ways,
I think many of which are useful,
trying to get you to organize
different types of habits
into different bins, like
value-based, and goal-based,
and trying to persuade you
that structuring habits at
the particular times of day
or in a particular way are
going to be beneficial,
and indeed, I think they
have helped a lot of people.
So what I'd like to do is to
take the scientific literature
of how the nervous system learns
and engages in plasticity,
and apply that to habit formation,
habit maintenance, and if so desired,
how to break particular habits.
I'd like to give you a particular tool
that's gleaned from the
research psychology literature.
I should mention that I learned about this
from an excellent review article
that's available online.
It's called Psychology of Habit.
The authors are Wendy
Wood and Dennis Ruenger,
this is published in Annual
Review of Psychology.
The Annual Reviews series is
a very high quality series.
There are annual reviews of neuroscience,
annual reviews of psychology,
annual reviews of nutrition
science, et cetera.
For those of you
that are interested in
exploring review articles
that are grounded in hundreds of quality,
peer-reviewed studies,
the Annual Review series
is really terrific.
Certainly among the best, if not the best.
And they also tend to be quite
long and quite comprehensive.
So this review, Psychology
of Habit by Wood
and Ruenger, is excellent.
And here I'm more or less
paraphrasing from them,
so I want to be clear that
these are their words, not mine.
They're talking about the various ways
that habits form in the nervous system
and they mention, with
each repetition of a habit,
small changes occur in the
cognitive and neural mechanisms
associated with procedural memory.
So I just want to talk for a second
about what procedural memory is.
In the neuroscience of memory,
we distinguish between
what's called episodic memory
and procedural memory.
Episodic memory is a recall
of a particular set of events
that happened,
whereas procedural memory
is holding in mind the
specific sequence of things
that need to happen
in order for a particular
outcome to occur.
So think of it like a
recipe or a protocol,
or for the sake of exercise,
it's like sets and reps,
or a particular course that
you're going to run or cycle,
or the number of laps you're going to swim
and how you're going to perform it.
It's very clear that for anyone
trying to adopt new habits,
getting into the mindset of
procedural memory is very useful
for overcoming that barrier
that we call limbic friction.
How do you do that?
Well, a simple visualization exercise,
or it doesn't even have
to be done eyes closed.
You know, often times we
hear visualization exercise,
you think about sitting in a
lotus position, eyes closed,
you know, trying really
hard to visualize something.
Doesn't need to be anything like that.
It can simply be, if you are
deciding to adopt a new habit,
to just think about the very
specific sequence of steps
that's required to execute that habit.
And I'll use a trivial example,
but this could be applied to anything.
Let's say I want to get into
the habit of making myself,
or someone else in my household,
a cup of espresso every morning,
I would actually think
through each of those steps.
Walk into the kitchen, turn
on the espresso machine,
draw the espresso.
Walking through each of those
steps, from start to finish,
and it turns out just that
simple mental exercise done once
can shift people towards
a much higher likelihood
of performing that habit regularly,
not just the first time,
but as they continue out into the days
and weeks that follow.
So that's remarkable to me
and the literature is really robust.
Just one mental exercise
of thinking through
what are the sequence of steps required
in order to perform this
habit from start to finish
can shift the likelihood of
being able to perform that habit
from unlikely or moderately likely,
to very likely over time.
And that's because it
pulls from this process
that involves our
hippocampus and our neocortex
and other areas of our
brain and nervous system,
that engage in procedural memory.
It shifts the brain towards
a mindset, if you will.
It's more of a neural circuit
set, would be more accurate.
But a mindset/neural circuit set
of doing things in a particular sequence,
which allows that limbic
friction to come down
and increases the likelihood
that we're going to perform that thing.
Simple tool but very powerful too,
according to the psychology literature.
And actually, the cellular
and molecular mechanisms
that underlie that sort
of procedural memory,
stepping through phenomenon are known.
In this article I mentioned,
this beautiful review,
they talk about so
called Hebbian learning.
Donald Hebb was a psychologist in Canada
and birthed this field
that has now lasted, gosh,
more than 50 years and
is still very strong
in neuroscience and psychology
of Hebbian learning.
Hebbian learning is when
particular neurons are co-active,
meaning when they fire together,
they tend to strengthen their connections
with one another.
And it has a number of different cellular
and molecular features
that we don't have to go into in detail,
but for those of you that want to know,
I know some of you are hungry
for a little bit more neuroscience,
this involves things like NMDA receptors
and methyl-D-aspartate receptors.
NMDA receptors are
really important I think
for everyone to understand.
So I'll just tell you a
little bit about them.
These are receptors that
are on the neuron's surface
and normally they don't contribute much
to the activity of those neurons.
Those neurons are perfectly
capable of doing their thing
without activation of this NMDA receptor.
But when a neuron gets
a very strong input,
a strong stimulus,
that NMDA receptor triggers
a number of mechanisms
that recruit
to the surface of the
neuron more other receptors.
In other words, it makes
that neuron more responsive
to input in the future
such that it doesn't
require so much input.
In other words, it takes a neuron
that is very unlikely to fire
and makes it more likely to fire.
So this procedural stepping through
of the steps of the recipe
or the series of actions
steps that are involved
in sitting down to study
and writing for an hour,
or generating exercise,
whatever is the habit that
you're trying to learn.
When you're doing that exercise,
it's not as if your nervous system
thinks you're actually
performing that behavior.
Your nervous system isn't stupid.
It's actually a lot smarter than that.
It knows the difference between
a thought and an action,
but when you do that,
it sets in motion the same neurons
that are going to be required
for the execution of that habit.
And so when you actually show
up to perform that habit,
it's as if the dominoes fall more easily.
It's a lower threshold, as we say,
in order to get the habit to perform.
So, Hebbian learning, NMDA receptors,
all that nuts and bolts stuff.
Really the guts of the
mechanisms of how this works.
But for those of you that just want
to be more habitual about certain things,
be able to perform certain
things more reflexively,
that you would like in your life,
simply take the time,
do it once, maybe twice,
and just sit down, close
your eyes if you like,
and just step through the procedure
of what it's going to take in
order to perform that habit.
The psychology literature, as I mentioned,
and also the neuroscience literature,
strongly supports the fact
that it is going to make it far easier
for you to adopt and maintain that habit.
And if you are somebody who
used to perform a habit,
and you don't understand
why you dropped it,
and you're frustrated with yourself,
and you're trying to figure out
how you can get back into that habit,
well by all means,
lean right back into that habit,
but if you're having trouble doing that,
also just use the
procedural memory exercise
in order to shift your nervous system
towards a higher likelihood
that you will return to that habit
just the same way I described for trying
to initiate a new habit.
So now I'd like to discuss a second,
and what I think is perhaps
the most powerful tool
for being able to acquire
and stick to new habits.
This tool is rooted in what
we call neural circuits
and I do think it is important
to understand a little bit
about how those neural circuits work.
For those of you that are saying,
"Just tell me what to do."
I have to say, as I always say,
understanding a little bit or
a lot of underlying mechanism
will help solidify these concepts for you
and will help ensure that the tools
that I offer are going to make sense
and that they're going
to make sense in differing contexts
and for different types of habits
that you're tying to learn.
So, rather than just tell you what to do,
I'm going to tell you how
this particular tool works,
and then in doing that,
you should be able to
apply it to any habit,
under any conditions.
The tool that I'm referring to
is something called task-bracketing
and the neural circuits
associated with task-bracketing
are basically the neural circuits
that are going to allow you
to learn any new type of habit
or break any habit that
you'd like to break.
We have in our brain a
set of neural circuits
that fall under the umbrella
term of the basal ganglia.
The basal ganglia are
involved in action execution,
meaning doing certain things,
and action suppression,
not doing certain things.
In the experimental realm,
these are referred to as go, meaning do,
or no go, don't do, certain things.
And some of us fall more into the category
of we find it very easy
to do certain things,
but harder to not do other things.
Some people have a lot
of no go type circuits
that are very robust,
and they have a lot of
behavioral constraint,
but they have a harder
time getting into action.
And some people have a
perfect balance of both,
but I've never met one of those people.
So again, drawing from,
more or less paraphrasing
from this beautiful review
that I described earlier
in Annual Review of Psychology, excuse me,
by Wood and Ruenger,
task-bracketing involves a
particular set of neural circuits
within the basal ganglia,
so I'm going to describe this
here, again paraphrasing,
a sensory-motor loop.
Sensory means just input
coming in about sight, sounds,
taste, et cetera.
And then the motor systems,
the systems of the brain and
body that generate action,
taking that information
and generating action.
So it turns out that there's
an area of our basal ganglia
called the dorsolateral striatum,
we can use the acronym DLS.
Again, dorsolateral striatum.
Dorso means up. Lateral means to the side.
So dorsolateral.
And striatum is a subdivision
of the basal ganglia.
And it's very important
for the establishment of behaviors
that are associated with a habit,
but not necessarily the habit itself.
And beautiful studies in
both animals and humans
that record the activity in
the dorsolateral striatum
find that the dorsolateral
striatum is associated,
meaning it becomes active at the beginning
of a particular habit,
and at the very end and
after a particular habit.
Hence the phrase task-bracketing.
It brackets the habit.
Now, other sets of neurons
are going to be active
during the actual execution of the habit,
but what the literature on
the dorsolateral striatum
tells us is that we have
particular circuits in our brain
that are devoted to framing the events
that happened just before
and as we initiate a habit,
and just after and as
we terminate a habit.
In other words, it acts
as a sort of marker
for the habit execution,
but not the execution of the habit per se.
This is very important
because task-bracketing
is what underlies whether
or not a habit will be
context dependent or not,
whether or not it will be strong
and likely to occur
even if we didn't get good
night's sleep the night before,
even if we're feeling distracted,
even if we're not feeling like
doing something emotionally,
or if we are, you know,
completely overwhelmed
by other events.
If the neural circuits
are task bracketing,
are deeply embedded in us,
meaning they are very robust
around a particular habit,
well then it's likely
that we're going to go out
for that zone II cardio no matter what,
that we're going to brush
our teeth no matter what.
I'm fact, brushing our teeth
is a pretty good example
because, for most people,
even if you got a terrible night's sleep,
even If everything in
your life is going wrong,
chances are, unless you're very depressed,
if you're going to leave to work,
or even if you're not,
that you're going to still
carry out the behavior
of brushing your teeth in the morning.
I would hope so, actually.
But you are probably less likely
to perform particular habits
that are not what you deem as necessary.
But if you think about it,
brushing your teeth, exercise,
eating particular foods,
maybe engaging socially
in particular ways,
you are the one that places
any kind of value assessment
on which ones are essential,
and which ones are negotiable.
So task-bracketing sets a neural imprint,
a kind of a finger print in your brain,
of this thing has to happen
at this particular time of day
so much so that it's reflexive.
And as we'll talk about in a moment,
there's a way that you can
build up task-bracketing
so that regardless of what
it is you're trying to learn,
there's a much higher probability
that you're going to do that thing.
And when I say learn,
meaning let's say you're
trying to acquire a habit
that for you is really challenging.
Maybe it's that you're going
to write for an hour a day
on a book project that
you've been thinking about
or you're going to work on mathematics,
or you're going to do any sort of thing
that for you there's a
lot of limbic friction.
While it is important to think
about the sequence of events
that would be required in order
to engage in that behavior,
that procedural memory
visualization exercise
we talked about before, that will help,
there's a way also that you
can orient your nervous system
towards this task-bracketing process,
so that your nervous system is shifted
or oriented towards the
execution of a given habit.
So this is sort of like warming
up your body to exercise.
When the dorsolateral striatum is engaged,
your body and you brain are
primed to execute a habit
and that you get to consciously insert
which habit you want to perform.
So in order to leverage
the neural mechanisms
of task-bracketing,
in order to increase the likelihood
that you're going to
perform a particular habit,
I have to break it to you
that one thing that you've
probably heard over and over
about habit formation
is not true.
And what I'm referring to is this idea
that if you're very specific
about exactly when you're going
to perform a particular habit,
that you're more likely
to perform that habit.
And while that is true in the short term,
it is not true in the long term.
And the reason for that is
that our nervous system tends
to generate particular kinds of behavior
based not on time, but on our state.
Meaning what level of
activation is taking place
in our brain and body.
How much focus we happen to have,
how fatigued we are, how energized we are.
So while schedules are important,
it's not the particular time of day per se
that's going to allow
you to get into a habit,
and form that habit, and
consolidate that habit.
Rather, it's the state that your brain
and body are in that's
important to anchor yourself to.
So now I'm going to offer you a tool.
It's actually an entire program
by which you can insert
particular habits and activities
at particular phases of the day,
not times of day, but phases of the day,
because it turns out that
particular phases of the day
are associated with particular
biological underpinnings,
chemicals and neural
circuits and so forth,
and in doing so it will
make it far more likely
that you will be able to
regularly engage in these habits
and activities over a long period of time.
And whether or not that
will move you from somebody
who ordinarily would take
200 days to form a habit
to one of those 18 days to habit people
in that earlier study I
mentioned, I don't know.
But I am certain that will
have a significant shift
on allowing you to engage in
particular habits more easily
and to consolidate those
habits more quickly.
So the program I am about to describe,
I formulated for you based on
the neuroscience literature,
and the psychology literature of learning,
and this concepts of task-bracketing.
It involves the 24 hour days
into what I call three phases.
The first is phase one,
which is 0 to 8 hours after
waking up, approximately.
Okay, you can put a plus
or minus 30 minutes on this
for yourself.
The second phase is the
9 to 14, maybe 15 hours
after you wake up.
And the third phase is 16
to 24 hours after waking up.
So we've taken the 24 hour cycle,
we've carved it up into three phases,
phase one, phase two, and phase three.
Now, everything I'm describing,
or at least the way I'm
going to describe it,
is based on what I would
call a typical schedule,
diurnal schedule.
You've heard of nocturnal?
Well, we are diurnal.
Most of us are asleep at night
and awake during the day.
I do realize that a number
of people have shift work
or they have newborns or other reasons
why they have to be up in
the middle of the night
and sleeping during the day.
If that's the case,
please listen to the
episode we did on jet-lag
and shift work because
that has a lot of tools
specifically for that population.
But most people go to sleep
somewhere around 10:00 PM,
plus or minus two hours,
and wake up some time around 7:00 AM,
plus or minus two hours.
So today, I'm going to
use the to bed at 10:00 PM
and a wake up time of 7:00
AM as the framework for this,
but you could adopt it easily
to your particular schedule.
Phase one, which again, is
0 to 8 hours after waking,
has a particular neurochemical signature.
Regardless of what you do,
the neuromodulators norepinephrine
as well as epinephrine,
so that's noradrenaline and adrenaline,
as well as the neuromodulator dopamine
tend to be elevated during
that first 0 to 8 hours
after waking.
There are a number of reasons
for this related to the fact
that also cortisol is higher
in our brain and bloodstream,
it's a healthy level of
cortisol upon waking,
body temperature is increased, et cetera.
And there's several things
that perhaps we should all be doing,
I've talked about many of
these on the podcast before,
that in addition to those chemicals,
further support an
alert and focused state.
And I'll just list those off.
I've done many podcasts on each of these
if you'd like to access those
podcasts you can find them
in the menu of podcasts on YouTube,
Apple, Spotify, et cetera.
They involve, for instance,
viewing sunlight or
bright artificial light
if you can't access sunlight,
within the first 30 minutes of waking.
Physical exercise of some kind
in this phase of the day,
0 to 8 hours of the day,
ideally pretty early in that phase,
but, you know,
if it has to be at the 7
to 8 hour transition point
that's fine too.
Cold exposure in the form
of cold showers or ice baths
or outside with minimal clothing,
appropriate yet minimal clothing.
Caffeine ingestion.
Fasting, for instance,
not ingesting calories,
also will lend itself to
increased norepinephrine
and dopamine, et cetera.
If you are going to consume foods,
foods that are rich in
things like tyrosine,
which is a precursor for dopamine.
You can look up foods
that are high in tyrosine.
And for those of you that are
interested in supplementation
and like to use those routes,
things like alpha GPC or
phenylethylamine, think,
or L-tyrosine,
if that's in keeping with
what you're able to do.
Of course, consult your doctor
if you're going to rely
on supplementation.
What's this all about?
Well, the already elevated norepinephrine
and dopamine, the sunlight, exercise,
cold exposure, caffeine,
tyrosine, et cetera,
all of those place the
brain and body into a state
in which you are better able,
or I would say, more easily able,
to engage in activities
that have a high degree limbic friction
and where you need to
override that limbic friction.
Right? We've heard that the
morning is kind of sacred,
conquer the hardest things
first thing in the morning,
and that's been discussed in
the pop psychology literature
and in the habit formation literature
merely from the perspective of
get it out of the way so you can feel good
about having done it.
But what I'm referring
to is quite different.
What I'm referring to is
a particular phase of day
that after rising, after
waking up, that is,
for 0 to 8 hours, right,
in that first phase,
your whole system is
action and focus oriented.
And we know that when you're
action and focus oriented
and because of the neurochemicals
that are naturally released
in your brain and body
that you will be more likely
to overcome any limbic friction
that stands in the way of
performing particular habits.
So, as you list out or think
about the various habits
that you'd like to adopt in
your life, take the habits
for which you know
there's the highest degree
of limbic friction,
they are the hardest for you to engage in,
they require the most activation energy,
and put those in this 0
to 8 hours after waking.
This will greatly
facilitate your performance
of those new habits.
I'm certain of that.
And in addition to that,
by doing them in this
particular phase of the day,
not necessarily the same time,
I mean, if you want to be very habitual,
and you want to do,
you know, the exercise,
or the sunlight viewing
always at the same time,
or you want to do,
you want to drink your caffeine
always at the exact
same time, that's fine,
but by placing them in this broader window
of 0 to 8 hours after waking,
what you're doing is you're
creating task-bracketing.
You're making it such
that your nervous system
will predict when you are going to lean in
against limbic friction
in order to perform
particular types of habits.
And this is very different than saying,
"I'm always going to run" or,
"I'm always going to study from
10 to 12 AM every morning."
That's great, and if you
can do that, terrific.
But the literature indicates
that people who do that,
who are very rigid about
when they do things tend,
because of context dependence,
to not necessarily stick
to those habits over time.
Some people do, but
many, many people don't.
So think about the hardest habits to form
and the habits that you most want to form
that are hardest for you
to adopt and to maintain
and I highly suggest
placing those somewhere
within this phase one of
0 to 8 hours after waking.
Now of course, some of
the things I listed out,
sunlight viewing, exercise, cold exposure,
caffeine, fasting,
those might be the
actual habits themselves,
but here I realize, or
rather I want to acknowledge
that many people, including myself,
are doing some or all
of these things already
and many people, including myself,
are trying to adopt new habits
that don't fall into the category
of just trying to set your overall state.
Again, norepinephrine, dopamine,
and all these neural systems
will be greatly elevated in
this 0 to 8 hours after waking.
However, the other things I mentioned,
sunlight exposure,
exercise, cold exposure,
caffeine, fasting, if that's for you,
or if you're eating during that phase,
eating things that contain some
or elevated levels of tyrosine,
maybe supplementing alpha
GPC or L-tyrosine, et cetera.
All of those things further
facilitate the neurochemistry
and therefore the state of mind
that's going to be ideal for
leaning into limbic friction
and overriding that limbic friction
so that you can regularly
perform that habit.
What we're really talking about here
is leveraging neural systems
in order to help you make it more likely
that you're going to be able to engage
and maintain a particular habit.
So what I'm referring to as
phase one of each day is useful
for acquiring certain habits,
but there are other phases of the day,
and those turn out to be useful
for acquiring other types of habits.
Phase two, as I mentioned, is about,
again these aren't specifics,
but about 9 to 14 or
15 hours after waking.
During this phase of the day,
because of the circadian
shifts in our biology,
the amount of dopamine and norepinephrine
that's circulating in our brain
and bloodstream tends
to start to come down
and levels of cortisol
tend to start to come down.
That's the ideal circumstance.
In fact,
you don't really want elevated
cortisol late in the day.
That's actually a signature of depression
and anxiety and a number of
other unfortunate things.
So, 9 to 14 hours after waking dopamine
and norepinephrine and cortisol
are starting to taper down,
just naturally.
And a different neuromodulator, serotonin,
is starting to rise.
Serotonin is definitely
going to be highest
in this second half of the day
and tends to lend itself to a
more relaxed state of being.
Now of course,
I do realize that some people
are less of morning people
and do find that they really come alive
and awake in the afternoon,
but most people don't
fall into that category.
Most people feel more
alert early in the day,
even anxious early in the day,
and then, as the afternoon progresses,
they tend to be a bit more
sleepy, a bit more relaxed,
a bit more calm.
There's certain things that we all can
and should do during this
phase two of each day
that lend themselves to a state of mind
and a state of body that
is going to be beneficial
for the generation and consolidation
of certain types of habits.
What are those things?
First of all, as the day goes on,
you should try if you can
to start tapering the amount
of light that you're viewing.
Now, this doesn't mean putting yourself
into dim light at 3 o'clock
4 o'clock in the afternoon.
That's certainly not the case.
Simply that you want to
start tapering off the amount
of really bright light
that you're getting,
unless it's sunlight.
Talked about this before on the podcast,
but if you haven't heard,
viewing the sun as it's at
what we call low solar angle
so it's headed toward the horizon,
you don't necessarily
have to watch the sunset,
although that can be nice.
But getting some sun light in your eyes
in the second half of the
day can also be beneficial
for a number of brain systems
and psychological systems
so you can get some
some light in your eyes,
you can certainly have
artificial lights on,
but you want to start dimming those lights
and bringing them actually
physically lower in the room
because the neurons in your eye
that view the upper visual field
they actually trigger
this alertness mechanism
in the brain and body.
And in the second half of the day,
even if you're humming
around and doing work at 3
or 4 or 5 or even 7 PM,
you are probably headed toward
sleep a few hours later,
so things like limiting
the total amount of light
if you can,
things like NSDR, non-sleep deep rest,
another thing that I've
talked about on this podcast.
If you haven't heard about this before,
non-sleep deep rest is an umbrella term
for things like
meditation, for Yoga Nidra,
a very powerful science supported tool
for teaching you how to relax,
things like self-hypnosis
which might sound a little
kooky to some of you,
but actually is a clinically based tool
for which there's a lot
of scientific literature.
If you're interested in that
there's a great free
resource called Reverie,
R E V E R I E .com.
There's a app for both Apple and Android.
This is an app that was
developed by colleagues of mine
and researchers at Stanford
School of Medicine.
You can do these short
15 self hypnosis script,
as they're called.
They can teach you how to relax yourself,
there's even one for focus,
for sleep, for chronic pain,
Again, all very strongly supported
by quality peer-reviewed literature.
So things like Reverie, meditation,
things like heat and sauna,
hot baths, hot showers.
Those are terrific things
to do in the second half
of the day,
they tend to support this serotonergic,
or high serotonin like state
and lend themselves to
more calm and relaxation.
For those that are interested
in supplementation,
there's always ashwagandha,
which reduces cortisol,
again peaks in cortisol
late in the afternoon
and evening are associated
with depression,
anxiety, and so forth.
Ashwagandha has a pretty potent
cortisol inhibiting tool.
I personally don't use it very often
and I caution people about using it
for longer than two-week periods of time
without taking some breaks.
You can look up more about
ashwagandha on examine.com.
There's a lot of traffic literature
with links to studies there.
But basically this phase two of the day
is one in which you're
alert, you are present
you are working, you
are engaging socially,
you're cooking dinner probably,
paying attention to a number of things,
but you should really be trying
to taper off your stress level.
So how do you leverage
phase two of the day
for habit formation?
Well, given what we know
about the neurochemistry
of learning and memory,
given what we know about task formation
and its reliance on certain
forms of neuroplasticity,
the second half of the
day is a terrific time
to take on habits and things
that you're already doing
that require very little
override of limbic friction.
So these might be things that
categorize in common terms
as kind of mellower activities.
It might be journaling,
it might be that you
already are performing music
or I should say,
practicing music regularly,
but there's a particular type of music
that is hard for you
or that you're working on a
particular piece of music,
or you're trying to learn a language.
Something that's a little bit challenging,
but doesn't require a ton of energy
in order to override that limbic friction.
The second half of the day is
a much better time to do that.
Less resistance, as we might say.
But of course, resistance
has a neural substrate
and the reason for doing those things
in the second part of the
day, the so-called phase two,
as I've called it, part of the day is
because your ability
to override resistance
is really diminished
in this second phase of the day.
Some of you might say,
"Whoa wait,"
"I like to exercise in the
second half of the day."
"That's actually when I
have the most energy."
"That's when I feel warmer"
"I'm not a morning exerciser."
That's absolutely fine,
but what I'm referring
to is the acquisition
of new behaviors
and placing those consistently
at the second half of the day
in order to engage these
task-bracketing mechanisms
that I talked about before.
One of the hallmark features
of those basal ganglia circuits for go
and no-go is that they are associated
with certain neurochemicals,
dopamine and serotonin,
acetylcholine, and other neurochemicals.
And by placing particular habits
at particular phases of the day,
those neurochemical states
start to be associated
with the leaning in and
the process of beginning,
and as I mentioned, ending
those particular habits.
And in doing so they shift
the whole nervous system
toward being able to predict
that certain things are going to happen
at particular times a day,
that you're going to be leaning very hard
against limbic friction early
in the day in phase one,
and that you're going to be doing things
that require less conscious
override of limbic friction
in phase two.
And in doing so, set up
task-bracketing system
so that the individual
habits that you're learning
or that you're trying to learn
have a much greater
probability of being executed
and consolidated,
meaning that pretty soon that they
will just naturally become reflexive.
And as with phase one, many
of the things that I mentioned
that support this, what I'm
calling a serotonergic state
or more relaxed state in phase two,
things like seeing
sunlight in the afternoon,
but not a lot of bright light
from artificial sources,
things like NSDR,
things like heat and sauna,
hot baths et cetera, ashwagandha,
again all of those things
themselves could be habits
that you're trying to adopt, right?
In that case, do those if
you'd like to explore them.
They are quite beneficial
for a number of reasons,
not just related to execution
of particular habits
in phase two of the day,
but also for improving quality of sleep
and consolidating any learning
that you might have
triggered earlier in the day.
I've talked about that before,
but just briefly, as a relevant aside,
neuroplasticity involves
triggering the neural plasticity,
setting it in motion,
but the actual rewiring of the brain
and the reconfiguration of neurons
that will allow that
learning to be reflexive,
that actually occurs
during states of deep rest,
like an NSDR and like deep sleep.
And I should just mention,
for those of you that can only exercise
or prefer to exercise in
phase two of the day, right,
9 to 14 hours or 15 hours after waking,
that's absolutely fine.
However, because of
the importance of sleep
and in particular deep
sleep throughout the night
for not just neuroplasticity,
but recovery of muscle and other tissues
that are taxed during physical exercise,
if you do train in phase two,
I highly recommend, highly recommend
that you start doing some
NSDR activity after you train,
within an hour or two,
because that will allow
you to taper down and relax
so that you can get into
the next phase we're going
to talk about, which is phase three.
Phase three of the 24-hour schedule runs
from about 16 to 24 hours after waking.
During that period of time,
there are few things
that are going to support
being in a state of mind,
state of body that are going
to allow neuroplasticity
to occur, that are going
to allow the rewiring
that you've triggered during
the waking part of the day
to actually take place.
Those things are very low to no light,
meaning keeping your environment very dark
or very, very dim.
I don't think it's
necessary to sleep in a room
that's complete blackness.
I think that's a little bit overkill,
but for most people keeping the room dark
and keeping the room temperature
low is very beneficial
for getting and staying in deep sleep.
The body has to drop
by about 1 to 3 degrees
in order to get into
sleep and stay asleep,
so low light, low temperature environment,
you can always pile on blankets of course
if you don't want to be cold at night,
you want to be warm enough,
but you want your environment to be cold.
Typically people aren't eating
in the middle of the night,
although one thing that can
be useful is to make sure
that you're at least well-fed enough
when you head into this third
phase of every 24-hour day
that you're not awake
because you're hungry.
A lot of people recommend putting a gap
between your final bite of food
and when you got to sleep at night.
Some people say that
gap should be 4 hours,
other people say 2 hours,
if you're me, I generally
have something, I don't know,
within 2 hours or 90
minutes of going to sleep,
but it's not a big meal,
but that's just me,
and I fall asleep and stay
asleep fine with that.
You have to experiment for yourself.
I've talked about supplements
that can support sleep in
previous episode of the podcast,
things like magnesium threonate,
or magnesium bisglycinate,
things like theonine, apigenin.
If you'd like to read more about those,
we actually have a newsletter
that I'll just quickly refer you to
this is the Huberman Lab
Neural Network Newsletter,
you can sign up for it by
going to hubermanlab.com,
it's very easy to find,
but even if you don't sign up,
you can go to the toolkit
for sleep that's listed there
and that tool kit is not just supplements,
that tool kit is a number
of different things,
both behavioral and supplement-based
and nutrition-based, et cetera,
that can allow you to get in to sleep
and to stay asleep more readily.
It's totally zero cost,
you can find that again
at hubermanlab.com.
So things like low light, low temperature,
the supplements I mentioned,
adjusting your eating
schedule appropriately,
obviously not drinking caffeine
in the middle of the night
or too close to bed,
that's going to be critical.
In fact, ideally you
wouldn't ingest any caffeine
in phase two of the day,
so that you could get into
this deeper state of rest
in which habit formation and
neural plasticity can occur.
What if you wake up?
The way I've cast phase three is
that you're supposed to
be in this deep slumber,
you're not supposed to wake up at all,
you're supposed to be in low light
and your brain is rewiring
and those habits are getting
consolidated, et cetera.
Well, if you're like me,
you probably get up once
in the middle of the night.
Maybe go use the restroom.
Perfectly normal, perfectly normal,
but a lot of people have
trouble falling back asleep.
Very important if you get up
in the middle of the night
to use a minimum of light
in order to navigate your surroundings,
just as much as you need
in order to safely do so,
because light inhibits hormone melatonin,
can make it very hard
to fall back to sleep
if you inhibit melatonin.
The effects of light inhibiting melatonin
are actually very potent.
It happens very, very quickly,
so try and keep the lights low.
And you have trouble falling back asleep,
that's when you might
also want to use something
like a Reverie app,
they have a sleep script there
that can hopefully help
you get back to sleep.
Or something like NSDR,
you can find NSDR scripts on YouTube.
These are zero cost.
You can look up one
that I particularly like is NSDR Madefor.
It's a company I'm associated with,
but the NSDR is completely zero cost,
and there are other things,
like Yoga Nidra, which you can
find scripts for elsewhere.
Again, all of these
habits or these behaviors,
these do's and don'ts around phase three,
themselves might be habits
that you're trying to create for yourself.
But again, phase three is
really about making sure
that whatever limbic
friction you've been able
to override in phase one
and trigger some new habit, right?
Forcing yourself to write
or forcing yourself to study
or forcing yourself to exercise
during that high limbic friction state.
And then whatever things
you've been doing in phase two,
which are habits
that hopefully have moved
a little bit further
along the continuum of newly-formed
versus all the way to reflexive,
or things that take less limbic
friction in in order to do.
Phase three is when all
of that gets really locked
into the nervous system
through those Hebbian mechanisms,
like NMDA receptors, et cetera,
that I talked about before.
Again, neuroplasticity is
the basis of habit formation
and neuroplasticity and the
rewiring of neural circuits
happens in these states of deep sleep.
So if you're not obeying this phase three,
if you're not giving phase
three the material it needs,
and you're and you're not
avoiding the certain things,
like caffeine and bright light
and stress during phase 3,
you're simply not going to
be able to build those habits
that you've been working so
hard to trigger in phase one
and phase two of the day.
Again, these are things
that I've talked about previous
episodes of the podcast
and elsewhere, but really
this is about habit formation.
And the whole reason
for placing particular types of behaviors
at particular phases of the
day is to set a framework
for that task-bracketing.
Again, task-bracketing
and the circuits of the basal ganglia
indicate that it's not
just the neural circuits
that are engaged by the task itself,
but the neural circuits
that are engaged before
and after that task execution.
That's what gets consolidated.
So when you do things that
particular phases of the day,
under particular conditions
of neurochemistry,
what you're doing is
you're giving the brain a very
predictable set of sequences
that during sleep it can start
to put into your hard drive,
if you will.
It can really program it
into your nervous system,
so that within a short period of time,
hopefully within 18 or maybe even 6 days
or who knows? Maybe even fewer days,
you'll find that executing
those behaviors is very,
very straightforward for you
and that you won't have to
feel so much limbic friction
or override so much limbic friction.
Some of you are probably asking, okay,
if I perform a particular
habit during phase one,
and then I do other
habits during phase two,
and I eventually get to the point
where I'm engaging in those habits
in a pretty effortless way,
do I keep them in the
same phase of the day?
And the good news is, the
literature says it doesn't matter.
And in fact,
moving that particular habit
around somewhat randomly
can actually be beneficial to you
because actually moving
it from one time a day
to the other is that context independence
that we really are seeking.
By being able to do the same
thing that we want to do
regardless of time of day or circumstances
that's how we know
that we've achieved a
real habit formation,
that's how we know that
the habit has been moved
into certain components
of our neural circuity
that just allow us to do it
what seems like reflexively.
Although earlier I pointed out
that these aren't reflexes
in the traditional sense.
The reason for that is
that this brain area,
the hippocampus, that many
of you know is associated
with learning and memory,
is not actually where memories are stored.
The hippocampus is where
memories are formed,
it's where procedures, like
we talked about before,
procedural memory of how you're going
to execute a particular sequence,
where that's maintained.
So like if we use the recipe model,
that's where the recipe is maintained
until you know how to cook that dish
and then the procedural
memory literally migrates off
into a different set of neural circuits,
which are the neural
circuits of the neocortex
where we have maps of sensory experience,
maps of all kinds experiences,
including motor maps of
how to execute things.
So we use one part of the
brain to learn something,
but then that information,
in the form of the electrical
activity of neurons,
is passed off to a different brain area.
Now, the neurons themselves don't move
from the hippocampus to the cortex,
that doesn't happen.
What happens is the signals,
the sequence of electrical firing,
much like a script for a movie
or the notes on a sheet of paper
for a particular musical piece
is transferred off to
a different brain area.
So, that whole process
of really leaning into
something that's hard,
and then it becoming easier,
and then eventually that
things becoming more
or less reflexive involves a migration
of the information in the brain.
And once it's migrated out
to a different location in the brain,
at that point it's achieved
context-independence.
It doesn't have to be
bracketed by, you know,
your caffeine and your lunch.
It doesn't have to occur immediately
after your afternoon NSDR,
but before your four
O'clock meeting on Zoom,
or something of that sort.
So all this is to say
that once something has become reflexive,
you should play with it a
little bit about time of day.
If you want to keep it in
the same phase of day, great.
But if you one day decide
you're going to exercise in the afternoon,
the next day you decide
you're going to exercise in the morning,
and that's the habit that
you're concerned with,
that's terrific.
If you're able to do that, that means
that it's truly achieved
context-independence.
It means that you have
officially formed that habit.
And as I mentioned earlier,
much earlier at the
beginning of the episode,
the strength of a habit is dictated by
how much limbic friction, that was one,
and how much context dependence there is.
So when it doesn't take
much activation energy
to get into the execution of that habit
and you can do it in any context, well,
then you have formed a habit.
We really can't have a discussion
about learning anything,
habits or otherwise,
unless we talk about
reward prediction error.
Reward prediction error is associated
with the molecule dopamine,
although I should say there
are other neurochemicals
in our brain and body
that are also related to
reward prediction error.
But reward prediction error
is a very good system,
or I should say, a lens
through which to think about,
whether or not we should reward ourselves
for performing a given habit.
And this is a much larger discussion
that actually relates
to things like parenting
and self-regulation.
You know, should we reward
kids just for effort?
Should we reward
ourselves just for effort?
What should we reward?
How much should we reward ourselves?
When should we withdraw reward?
Should we use punishment?
These kinds of things.
This is a vast literature.
We don't have time to
go into all the details,
but the notion of reward
prediction error is so powerful
that it can predict most
if not all forms of learning,
including habit formation.
And you can deploy or
use particular features
of reward prediction error
if you would like to reinforce
or accelerate the formation
of certain habits.
So, reward prediction
error, quite simply, is
if you expect a reward
and the reward comes,
a particular behavior that was associated
with generating that reward is more likely
to occur again.
That's pretty straight forward.
However, the amount of reward,
in the form of this molecule dopamine,
that you will experience is even greater
if a reward arrives
that's unexpected. Okay.
So let me repeat that again.
If I think that something's
coming that's going to be great,
let's say I lean into a habit,
I manage to override my limbic friction,
and I'm doing my 45 minutes
of writing in the morning
with no phone and no internet
and I'm getting toward the end,
and I'm anticipating how
I'm actually doing this,
this is great, I did it,
I'm feeling really, really good.
I finish, I definitely will
receive a dopamine reward,
I'll make my own dopamine reward,
that's where it comes from.
Remember, this is all internal.
However, I will also
receive a dopamine reward
if unexpectedly something
positive happens.
And typically if something unexpected
but positive happens,
the amount of dopamine reward
that we get is actually much greater
than in any other conditions.
However, it's hard to surprise yourself
about a behavior that you're
deliberately engaging in.
So that becomes a bit of a tricky one.
Reward prediction error also says
that if we expect a reward
and the reward doesn't come
that the pattern of dopamine release
will follow a particular contour
and that contour is very important.
Here's how it goes.
Let's say that I'm writing
and I'm about 30 or 45 minutes in,
I'm thinking, "Ah, this is great."
"I'm actually, I managed to do this"
"I'm succeeding in
executing the behaviors"
"that I need to in order
to perform this habit."
"I'm overriding limbic friction."
Just that series of thoughts will start
to generate the dopamine release
within my brain and body.
However, if at the 15
minute mark the phone rings
and I pick up the phone
or I break my own protocol, I
break my own self-discipline
and I go on and check social media
or I do something that
takes me out of that,
what's going to happen is
that my level of dopamine
is actually going
to drop below the baseline,
meaning below the level of dopamine I had
before I even started the
habit execution. Okay?
So what this is, is this
system that predicts whether
or not rewards are going to come.
When we think a reward is going to come,
it starts to actually arrive earlier
in the form of dopamine release.
This is the feeling
that we experience as
positive anticipation.
You tell a kid,
"Hey, we're going to go
to the amusement park." Or
"We're going to go get ice cream."
They haven't had the ice cream yet,
they're not at the amusement park,
but they're excited, the
dopamine release comes earlier.
Okay? They get to the amusement park
or they get the ice cream,
they will also have some dopamine release
associated with that.
But most of it, believe it or not,
came in the form of the anticipation.
And dopamine has some qualities
that make the actual ice cream
and the actual amusement park
experience more pleasurable
than it would be had that
dopamine release not happened.
Now of course, the other way
to do is to surprise a kid.
You tell them,
"Listen, we're going to the
class that you absolutely hate."
Or "We're going to go see the person"
"that you absolutely despise."
And then you drive them
to the amusement park
that's the big release of dopamine.
But reward prediction error also says
that if you tell the kid, or yourself,
"Okay, we're headed to
the amusement park."
"We're going to get some ice cream."
They're really, really excited.
And then you get there and it's closed,
or they're not letting any more people in,
well then the dopamine level
drops way below what it was
before you told them that
you were headed there. Okay?
I've given a number of different examples
that hopefully make this clear.
Reward prediction error
governs virtually all aspects
of effort and all aspects of learning.
Why? Because when dopamine
is released in the brain
and body, the neural circuits
of our brain and body change.
There's a state change.
Our over level, excuse me,
our overall level of energy,
but also the sorts of sensory events
that we're paying attention to changes
when there's a lot of
dopamine in our system.
Now you can leverage
this for habit formation.
Think back to task bracketing.
Think back to limbic friction.
If you are considering
adopting a new habit
or if you are trying to break a habit,
something we haven't
talked too much about,
but we will in a moment, it's very useful
to think not just about
the procedural aspects
of what you're going to do,
but also think about
the events that precede
and follow that particular habit,
and the execution, or at least the effort
to execute that habit.
What you're doing is you're
casting a kind of a spotlight
around a bin of time, or a set of events,
for which dopamine can be associated.
What does this look like
in the practical sense?
Well again,
I'll just try and use very
simple concrete examples,
but this could carry over to anything.
Let's say I were somebody who
has a hard time getting in
that 30 to 60 minutes
of zone II cardiovascular
exercise mid-morning.
This is actually an issue for me.
I much prefer to do resistance exercise
than cardiovascular exercise,
although once I do it, I
always feel much better
that I've done it.
What I should do is positively
anticipate the onset
and the offset of that session. Right?
So thinking about leaning into the effort,
going out and doing that
zone II cardio session,
and I should think about
how I'm going to feel after.
So, not just thinking about
how great I'm going to feel after,
but also thinking about
how hard it's going to be
at the beginning,
and then trying to reward
myself subjectively
for the entire experience.
In other words, start
rewarding task-bracketing
in addition to rewarding the
execution of the habit itself.
Now some of you might be saying,
"Well, wait this is all self-talk."
"This is just positive self-talk."
But it's not positive self-talk,
it's not saying, you know,
"I feel so great about doing something"
"that I actually hate."
You can't lie to yourself,
or you're welcome to lie to yourself,
but the neuroscience literature,
the literature of growth mindset,
all the literature basically of mindset
speaks to the fact that
when you lie to yourself,
you know you're lying,
and you actually set up the
opposite of a reward system.
So, you have to be brutally
honest with yourself
that, for instance,
"I don't like initiating
this cardiovascular exercise"
"but I do like the fact that I've done it"
"after I've done it."
So what you are doing is
you are applying reward prediction error
to the entire sequence of things
that's involved in getting
into the habit execution,
getting through the habit execution,
and getting out of the habit of execution.
How do you do this?
Well, I take us back
to our procedural memory
visualization exercises
we talked about earlier.
When I talked about it in that context,
I talked about walking through
mentally the series of steps
that's required to perform
a particular habit.
So in the case of the zone
II cardio thing it would be,
"Okay up and put on my shoes,"
"then I'm going to head out the door,"
"then I'm going to drive up the road."
There is a particular
canyon near here that,
if I'm going to run,
I happen to like running, or
I don't hate running enough
that I tend to do it.
Going through that, heading
back, et cetera, et cetera.
That's great, but even better
would be to broaden the time bin
and start to positively
anticipate the period headed
into the habit, so even
before you put on your shoes.
The fact that you are
successfully placing the habit in,
in this case, phase one of the day
and that afterwards I'm going
to feel a particular set
of positive benefits,
elevated mood, et cetera.
I like being hungry and quickly
after I exercise I'm hungry,
so I like being hungry
because I like eating,
so there's a whole set of things
that link up with one another.
So I'm not just thinking
about habit execution
as this isolated little set of events,
or this little time bin,
but rather, I'm drawing a
larger envelope around it
and starting to positively
associate dopamine reward
with that larger envelope.
And for those of you that are thinking,
"Well, this is just a
psychological trick."
You know, you're kind of like,
"This is sort of like lying to yourself."
It's not because you're not
actually contradicting the fact
that some of this is unpleasant.
What you're doing is
you're taking this
entire series of events,
what I'm calling this
kind of time envelope,
and you're associating it
with a particular reward
that comes later,
which for me would be the
feeling that, you know,
that I've completed this.
Right? Because for me that's
usually a good feeling.
So reward prediction error is beautiful,
not just because it's a
sort of math of anticipation
and reward, or a math of anticipation
and disappointment,
it's beautiful because you can stretch out
or make more narrow the time bins
in which reward prediction error works.
Reward prediction error is the way
in which people navigate
four year degrees.
Right? I mean, you go, sure, final exam
to final exam, et cetera.
But ultimately, there's
a big payoff at the end
and it's all basically
for that big payoff.
And of course, I understand
that it's the journey,
not the destination, but let's face it,
for a lot of us goals
and habits are about achieving
some sort of destination.
In the case of zone II cardio,
for me it's about trying to
stay alive for as long as I can,
as long as I can with vitality, that is.
And it's also the fact
that if I'm doing that,
I get to eat the foods that I like.
I tend to be able to eat more,
which I happen to really enjoy eating,
so much so that I'd like
it just as an activity.
So basically what you're trying to do
is not restrict your
thinking to just the habit
that you're trying to form, but rather,
to grab ahold of the timing before
and after that particular habit
and start to positively
associate reward mechanisms
in your brain with that entire time bin.
This is a very useful
and very powerful tool
in order to form habits.
And I should say that it's not something
that comes naturally to most people.
In fact, even as I describe it,
you might find it's still
a little bit abstract,
but what I encourage you to do,
if you are finding it to
be a little bit vague,
would be to pick the habit
that you want to form,
write down or think about very concretely
what is the sequence of steps involved
in the execution of that habit,
and then write down or think about
what is the sequence of events
that need to precede that habit,
maybe the immediate 10
or 15 minutes before,
as well as the immediate
sequence of events
and/or feelings that will
occur after that habit,
and then call the whole
thing a habit execution.
The whole thing a effort to
engage in that particular habit.
And in doing that, and
in positively associating
with the idea that you're going
to complete that entire sequence,
you will engage reward prediction error
in the proper way that the dopamine surge
can lend itself towards motivation.
Because ultimately, dopamine
is not about feeling good,
it's about feeling motivated.
This is something
that I've talked about
numerous times before,
but dopamine, contrary to popular belief,
is not a reward molecule,
so much as it is a molecule
of motivation and drive.
And the natural consequence
of doing the exercise I just described,
of writing things out that precede,
are involved in the immediate
execution of the habit,
and follow the habit,
will allow you to experience
an increase in energy
and thereby an increase in likelihood
that you're going to engage
in that entire sequence of events.
And the reason for that is
that dopamine gives us energy,
and the reason for that is
that the molecule epinephrine,
adrenaline, is actually
manufactured from dopamine.
Biochemically, it comes from dopamine.
So, dopamine is powerful
and you can access more dopamine
around even habits that
you haven't yet formed
by taking this broader time envelope
and task-bracketing that
specific task execution
or habit execution.
Way back at the beginning of the episode,
In promised you that I
would deliver two programs
that are geared towards habit formation.
And I promised that I would give you ways
in which you could gauge whether
or not certain habits had
moved from high effort,
what I call high limbic
friction, to reflexive.
And we talked about a
number of way to gauge that.
In researching this episode,
I found a tremendous
number of different systems
for habit formation.
It's really amazing how much is out there.
There, one says 60 days to this,
or 21 days to that, or 18 days to this.
I mean,
it's just rampant in the
popular psychology literature
and in the self-help literature.
I want to spell out a particular system
that I think could be very useful
to most if not all people
that's rooted in the
biology of habit formation,
rooted in the psychology
of habit formation,
and that is entirely
compatible with that phase one,
phase two, phase three type program
that I talked about earlier,
but encompasses a bit
of a longer time scale
and really arrives at a kind
of a system, if you will,
for how to build in habits
and then to test whether
or not those habits
have really stuck
and whether or not they're
likely to stick going forward.
And so this, at least for
the sake of this example,
a 21 day system.
I picked 21 days because
that seems to be the average
or most typical system for
engaging neuroplasticity
as it relates to the
formation of new habits.
This 21 day system, actually,
is one that someone I know very well uses
and has used for a very long time.
They actually, their kids use it as well.
And it has a certain elegance to it
and I think as I describe it that elegance
will begin to reveal itself.
So basically what this
involves is you set out
to perform 6 new habits per day
across the course of 21 days.
Why 6 and why 21?
Well, we'll talk about that in a moment.
But the idea is, you write down 6 things
that you would like to
do every day for 21 days.
What phase of the day
those things fall into?
Well, that will depend on what they are
and how they relate to
those earlier phase one,
phase two, phase three, but for now,
21 days, 6 things per day. However,
the expectation is that
you'll only complete 4
to 5 of those each day. Okay?
So built into this is a
kind of permission to fail,
but it's not failure,
because it turns out that this approach
to forming habits is based
not so much on the specific habits
that you're trying to form,
but the habit of performing habits. Right?
It's the habit of doing a
certain number of things per day.
So, you set out to perform 6.
Now, another reason for not
necessarily performing all 6 is
that some activities probably
shouldn't be performed each day.
For instance, in my case,
if I were to weight train
or even run every day, I'm of the sort,
or my biology is of the sort
that I don't recover so well.
So I wouldn't want to do
resistance training every day,
but I might want to do it 4
days a week, for instance.
So by having 6 things in that list,
you could shuffle out
that particular activity
on particular days of the week,
and simply do 4 or 5 other activities.
So 21 days, you list out 4 to 5 things.
So it might be zone II
cardio, resistance training,
sunlight viewing, writing
could be journaling,
it could be learning a
language, mathematics.
Again this is going to vary
depending on your particular goal
and the habits that
you're trying to create.
But no more than six
and the expectation is
that you're not going to
perform more than 4 to 5.
If you miss a day, meaning you
don't perform 4 to 5 things,
there is no punishment.
And in fact it's important
that you don't actually try
and do what, in the literature,
is called a habit slip compensation,
which is just fancy psychological language
for if you screw up and you
don't get all 4 or 5 in one day,
you don't do 8 the next
day in order to compensate.
This actually brings me
back to an example I had
from graduate school.
I remember when I started graduate school
feeling very excited, but
a little bit overwhelmed
by the amount of things that I had to do
because I had to both do
research, I was doing coursework,
at the time graduate students stipends,
and still now unfortunately,
were depressingly low
so it was financially stressful.
There were a number of things happening
and I remember a neurologist,
this was at UC Berkeley,
he was a really fantastic
scientist and person,
his name was Bob Knight,
some of you may know him.
I remember he, I went to
him and I asked, you know,
"What is the process by which someone"
"actually navigates graduate
school successfully?"
And he said, "Listen, you
don't want to do anything"
"or engage in a routine in any way"
"that you can't keep up consistently"
"for at least five and
ideally 6 days per week."
I thought, "Oh, that's pretty good."
And he said, "Every 4 or 5 years"
"you might have to update that,"
"but you need to decide what
you can do consistently,"
"what you can do every day
or at least six days a week,"
"or 5 days a week."
And that was very very useful to me
and it fits well with this
notion of habit slips,
that if you happen to screw
up and not be able to engage
in whatever habits you're trying to learn
for whatever reason, that the next day,
you just get right back on on
the on the horse, so to speak.
However, there's a really
interesting feature
from the neuroscience literature
and from the psychology that says
that chunking this 21 days into 2 day bins
can be very, very useful.
While it is true that the unit of the day
that our cells use is a
circadian one, a 24-hour clock,
there does seem to be something powerful
about engaging in particular habits,
in a particular sequence,
for two days in a row,
and then resetting, so thinking,
"Okay I can do this for a day"
"and if I can do it for a day,"
"I can probably do it for 2 days."
And then resetting. So every
2 days you're resetting.
So you're kind of chunking 21 days
into a series of 2 day bins,
in which you are trying
to perform 4 to 5 new habits
and then completing that 21 days.
Now, everything I've described
about this 21-day program
with 6 things that you're
trying to do with new habits
and only performing 4 to 5 and
not compensating, et cetera.
There's nothing neuroscientifically
unique about it,
except for the fact that
it's not just 21 days,
broken up into two day chunks.
After 21 days, you stop engaging
in this 21-day deliberate
4 to 5 things per day,
tight schedule, and you
simply go into autopilot.
You ask yourself how many
of those particular habits
that I was deliberately trying to learn
in the previous 21 days are
automatically incorporated
into my schedule?
How many of them am I naturally doing?
In other words, every
21 days you don't update
and start adding new habits.
You simply try and maintain the ones
that you built in that first 21 days.
And this I think is extremely important
because in all the habit
literature that I could find,
sure, there was a lot
of psychological data
and neuroscience data,
behavioral science data
around here's how you form a habit,
here's how you break a habit.
There was even some
kind of test for whether
or not a habit had really
achieved context independence,
whether or not it was a
strongly formed habit.
But there wasn't a lot of information,
at least by my search,
of what to do once you've formed a habit,
and how to evaluate whether
or not that habit is likely to
persist long into the future.
So here's the idea, you
set out these 6 things
that you would like to learn,
or that you would like
to acquire in your life,
these habits, you only expect
that you're going to
perform 4 or 5 each day,
you do that for 21 days.
Again, if you miss a day,
you just hop right back on the next day.
However, you should think
about the functional units
within this 21 day period as 2 days.
You can try and nail 4 to 5
of these things for 2 days.
If you happen to get all 6, great,
but that's not necessarily required.
So you can do it for 2
days then reset 2 days,
then reset 2 days, and
then in the next 21 days,
you're not trying to
acquire any new habits,
you're not going to throw in 6 more habits
that you want to learn,
you're simply going to assess
how well, how deeply, you
rewired your nervous system
to be able to perform those 6 habits
of the previous 21 days.
And this is extremely useful, I believe,
because it will allow you to asses whether
or not you can indeed make room,
if you even have room, I
should say, for more habits.
Many people are trying to
cram so many new behaviors
into their nervous system,
that they don't stand a chance
of learning all those behaviors.
What you may find,
is that you kept up 2 of
those things very consistently
throughout the 21 days.
And perhaps there was one of
them that you did sporadically,
and that there were 3
others that, frankly,
you didn't manage to execute.
You may also be one of these
people, one of these mutants,
that sets out to do 6 new
things per day for 21 days
and performs every single one of them.
Terrific. More power to you. In that case,
for the following 21
days, let's see whether
or not you can continue to
perform those very same 6 things
every day for 21 days,
and then, and only then,
would you want to add more habits in.
So you could repeat this
21 day process, you know,
21 days of new habit, 21 days
of testing those new habits
as to whether or not
they're reflexive or not.
You could do that forever, if you wanted.
But the idea is that this isn't something
that you're doing all year long.
It's that you're perhaps
starting the new year
or regardless of when
you're listening to this,
you set out to make that 21
day really the stimulus period
in which the habits get wired in
and then the following month,
and maybe even the following
months, or periods of 21 days,
are really the kind of
thermometer or the test bed
of how well you've embedded
those particular habits.
And if indeed you want to
continue to add new habits
or you find that certain
habits that you weren't able
to embed in your nervous
system and make reflexive,
you want to then bring
those in, fantastic.
But it's only once you've
achieved all those 6 habits
as reflexive, that you would move forward.
And I think this sort of system,
while it could have been replaced
with many other different systems.
Again, there's nothing
holy about this system.
But this particular system
has a number of features,
the lack of compensation for missed days,
the fact that it's a fairly
high intensity program
for 21 days, but then you test yourself,
a kind of competition test
with yourself, if you will.
Those features and the
fact that habit slips,
missing of particular habits
and not doing all 6 is kind
of built into the system,
I think makes it a very reasonable one.
It's very adaptable to the real world.
And I think it's one that,
provided you obey the phase one,
phase two, phase three type system
that we talked about earlier,
you collapse these two
programs with one another,
which hopefully will be easy,
based on the descriptions I've
given. Well, if you do that,
and I think there's a
very high probability
that the habits that you try and form
will achieve this context dependence
and that it will take
progressively less limbic friction
to try and perform them.
Thus far, we've almost
exclusively been discussing
how to form habits.
But what about breaking habits?
Certainly many people out there
would like to break habits
that they feel don't serve them well.
One of the challenges
in breaking habits is
that many habits occur very, very quickly
and so there isn't an
opportunity to intervene
until the habit has already been initiated
and in some cases completed.
Well, there are a couple of tools
that neuroscience and psychology tell us
can be very beneficial.
Some of those things
are somewhat intuitive
and relate to what I call
foundation practices.
Meaning things that set the overall tone
in your body and brain, such
that you would be less likely
to engage in a particular habit
or that would raise
your level of awareness,
both of your situation and
to how you feel inside.
So things like stress reduction.
Things like getting good sleep.
Things like quality nutrition.
Things like having positive routines
arranged throughout your day.
All of those, of course, will support you
in trying to break particular habits.
And while that can be very useful,
it's admittedly very generic advice.
It doesn't point to any
one specific protocol.
In order to identify a specific protocol
that one could apply in
order to break habits,
we have to look at the mirror image
of the sort of neuroplasticity
that we talked about at the
beginning of the episode.
At the beginning of the episode,
we talked about a form of neuroplasticity
called long term potentiation,
involving the NMDA receptor.
Just to refresh your memory a little bit,
it says that if a set of neurons
is very electrically active
it's likely that those
neurons will communicate
with themselves more easily
because of changes in things
like NMDA receptor activity,
the recruitment of additional
receptors, et cetera.
It's essentially a cellular
and molecular explanation
for how something goes from unlearned,
to learned, to reflexive.
Now, in order to break synapses,
or to break apart neural connections
that are serving a habit that
you don't want to engage in,
we need to engage the process
called long term depression.
And long term depression has nothing to do
with a state of mental depression
or a reduction in mood.
So I really want to be clear that
when I say depression in this context
it has nothing to do with
psychological depression,
it has nothing to do with mood.
It's simply called long term depression
because just as long
term potentiation says
if neuron A triggers
the firing of neuron B,
and it does so very robustly
over and over and over again,
then neuron A will not
have to fire as intensely,
or as frequently, in
order to activate neuron B
in the future because
they become potentiated.
Right? The threshold for
co-activation has been reduced.
There's a much higher probability
that they will be activated together
at low levels of intensity.
That's essentially what
long term potentiation is.
Long term depression says
that if neuron A is active
and neuron B is not active
within a particular time window,
then the connection between
neuron A and B will weaken
over time, even if they started
off very strongly connected.
Okay? So, I'm going to repeat that
because this is a pretty detailed
neurobiological mechanism
whereby if neuron A,
and neuron B is active,
but at a different time
or outside a particular,
what we call, temporal window,
meaning outside a particular time window,
then through long term depression,
the connection between neuron
A and neuron B will weaken.
And just as a point of interest,
the NMDA receptor is also
involved in long term depression,
although there are other
molecular components involved
as well.
So how do you take two neurons
that underlie a habit out of synchrony?
How do you get them to
fire asynchronously?
This is pretty interesting
with respect to the cellular
and molecular biology, but
at the behavioral level,
it's especially interesting.
They way that one would do this
is, let's say for instance,
you have a habit of picking up
your phone mid work session.
Okay? That's a reflexive habit I think
that most people have experienced.
And we often hear the idea that, oh,
the phone is so filled
with access to dopamine
and incredible things that
we're just drawn to it.
But if you noticed what's
happened with phone use over time,
most people, including
myself sometimes I admit,
find ourselves just looking at our phone,
or find ourselves in a particular app
without actually having engaged
in the conscious set of steps of,
"Oh I'm really curious"
"what's going on in this particular app."
"I'm really curious"
"what's going on in this
particular website."
And you just kind of "find
yourself", in air quotes,
for those of you listening,
I'm making air quotes.
You just sort of find yourself
doing it because the behavior
of picking up your phone
is sort of reflexive,
or has become fully reflexive.
You see this a lot at meals
where multiple people are there
and no one's looking at their phone
and then all of a sudden
someone takes out their phone
and you'll notice
that other people just
naturally take out their phone.
It's this kind observation induced reflex.
And I would wager that most
people aren't consciously aware
of the immediate steps involved.
So the literature says
there are a number of ways
to break these sorts
of habitual behaviors,
or reflexive behaviors.
Most of those approaches
involve establishing some sort
of reward for not performing the activity
or some sort of punishment
for forming the activity.
I've heard of some basic things
that some people will do,
like they'll even put like a
rubber band on their wrist,
and every time they complain,
or every time they do some behavior,
like pick up their phone,
they'll give themselves
a snap on the wrist.
And yeah, the rationale
there is that you're trying
to create a somatic, a very
physical representation
of something that makes it very real
and harder to overlook.
Other people will just do a
tick mark on a piece of paper.
This sort of, "What gets
measured is what gets managed"
kind of mindset, where if
every time you do something,
you take away the judgment,
this is very new age-y,
I realize, but this is
what you find out there,
if you search the literature.
Even on PubMed, peer-reviewed articles,
that every time you engage in a behavior,
you just measure the fact
that you did that behavior,
you just mark it down.
At the end of the day, people
are supposed to look at that
and say, "Oh my goodness!"
"I can't believe that I
spent, you know, 3 hours."
Or, "I did it 46 times."
And in fact, a lot of
apps, social media apps,
will start to give you
warnings now, if you opt in,
that you've been on the app for an hour,
would you like to leave?
Most people just click right
past it and go back in.
I think very few people
say, "Oh my goodness!"
"It's been an hour and
therefor you're right,"
"I absolutely shouldn't
engage in this any more."
It's just far to easy to just
blow past those reminders.
Well, the literature on habit formation
and habit reduction, breaking
habits, has been analyzed.
There's a beautiful meta-analysis,
which involves looking at a number
of different studies all together,
comparing the statistical
strength of each of those studies,
looking in different conditions
what sorts of habits were
trying to be made or broken.
The first author on this
review is Fritz, F R I T Z.
I'll certainly put a link to this.
It's Heather Fritz and it's
"Intervention to modify
habits: a scoping review."
And it is indeed a very
broad scale review. It's from
the Journal of Occupation
Participation and Health.
It's published in 2020.
It's a really nice article.
A couple of things I
learned from this article
and then I'll get into the specific tool
for breaking habits.
Perhaps the most interesting
thing that I took
from this review was the finding
that notifications to
either engage in habits
or to not engage in habits
actually were not very
effective over time.
They were effective in
the immediate period
when people started using
these notifications,
as were little sticky notes, like,
"Don't go into the refrigerator"
"between the hours of
whatever and whatever."
Or just visual reminders,
physical reminders or electronic reminders
were effective in the immediate term,
but in the long term,
did not predict whether
or not people would effectively stick
to habits they were trying to stick to,
or break habits that they
were trying to break.
So sadly, that doesn't
seem to work very well.
And perhaps they just need to come up
with more robust reminders.
I don't know, mild electric shock
or something like that
because what we do know,
only sort of kidding
about mild electric shock,
but what we do know from both human
and animal studies is that
things like electric shock,
things like monetary penalties, right?
Having to pay out every time you engage
in a particular behavior.
Those are pretty effective
ways to break habits.
The problems is when people
are not being monitored
for habit use, for instance,
you can imagine a situation where you say,
"I'm not going to pick up my phone"
"for the 4 hours in the
early part of the day"
"so I can get, you know, real
dedicated focused work done."
Unless someone's monitoring
them, then people don't tend
to monitor themselves completely enough
that they punish themselves
completely enough,
that they break the behavior.
In other words, the
punishment isn't bad enough,
in order to break the habit,
which just speaks to how
powerful these habits are
once they become reflexive.
They're just very, very hard to override.
So it turns out that the key
to generating long term
depression in these pathways
is actually to take the period
immediately following
the bad habit execution,
meaning, let's say you tell yourself
you're not going to pick up your phone,
you're not going to bite your nails,
you're not going to reflexively walk
to the refrigerator at a
particular time or day,
but you find yourself doing it anyway,
and what actually has to happen
is bringing conscious awareness
to the period immediately afterwards,
which I think most people recognize,
they realize "Ugh I just did
it again. I just did it again."
And in that moment, capture
the sequence of events,
not that led to the bad habit execution,
but actually to take advantage of the fact
that the neurons that were responsible
for generating that bad habit
were active a moment ago,
and to actually engage
in a replacement behavior
immediately afterward.
Now, this is really interesting
and I think powerful
because I would have thought
that you have to engage
in a replacement behavior
that truly replaces the
bad habit behavior, right?
That you would have to be able
to identify your state of mind
or the sequence of events
leading into the bad habit,
but rather, the stage
or the period immediately
after the bad habit execution,
is a unique opportunity to
insert a different type of,
what we would call adaptive behavior,
but that could be any
behavior that's not in line
with the bad behavior, so
let's give it an example.
Let's say you find yourself,
you're trying to do focused
work, you pick up your phone,
you're disappointed in yourself
for picking up your phone,
you could of course just put it down,
and re-engage in the work behavior,
but if you were good at that,
then you probably wouldn't have
done it in the first place.
And so, what turns out
to be very effective,
is to go engage in some
other positive habit.
Now, this has two major effects.
The first one is you start
to link in time the
execution of a bad behavior
to this other good behavior.
And in doing so, you start to
recruit other neural circuits,
other neurons, that can start
to somewhat dismantle sequence of firing
associated with the bad behavior.
In other words, you start to
create a kind of a double habit
that starts with a bad habit,
and then ends with a good habit.
And that seems to create
enough of a temporal mismatch
so that then recognizing
when you're heading toward to bad habit
becomes more apparent to you.
So again, I want to make
this very, very concrete.
Let's say
that the behavior is reflexively
picking up one's phone.
You do that, you think, "Ugh,
goodness, I did it again."
Here's what I'm going to do,
you would set that down
and then you would engage in
some other positive behavior,
that you've deemed positive.
And here, it's very
subjective, so it's hard
for me to give an example
that will necessarily
make sense to everybody,
but perhaps you're working on hydration,
so maybe you go have a glass of water.
Maybe you're trying to do
breath work or something.
Maybe you're trying to enhance
your language speaking skills
so you go and you spend 5 minutes
doing a particular type
of language learning.
You literally exit whatever you were doing
and perform that other new positive habit
in the immediate period right after that,
even for a short period of time.
It's a little bit counterintuitive,
but what this does it
creates kind of a cognitive
and a temporal mismatch between
the initial bad behavior,
which before is what we would
call sort of a closed loop,
and the engineers out there will know
what I'm talking about.
But in a closed loop, so one behavior,
one set of neural
firings, leads to another,
leads to another,
and then just kind of sets
the same thing in motion.
It can be kind of a self
perpetuating system.
By changing the number of
features that are in that loop,
it disrupts the closed
nature of that loop,
it creates what we call an open loop,
and in an open loop, you are
better able to intervene.
So, as I mentioned before, this
might seem counterintuitive,
you might think,
"Why would I want to reward
the execution of a bad habit"
"with a good habit."
"I don't want to reward
myself for the bad habit."
But really what you're
trying to do is you're trying
to change the nature
of the neural circuits
that are firing so that
you can rewrite the script
for that bad habit.
A different way to put it would be,
imagine that the bad habit
is like a chord on the piano
that you play, or a chord notes,
or a sequence of notes
that you would play,
and it comes very easily.
You can play it every single time.
But, let's say,
as you're trying to learn
a new piece of music,
you're just constantly inserting that
at the inappropriate time.
That was, you know, I think
it was a decent enough analogy
for a bad habit because it
involves some motor execution.
You just find yourself doing it.
Rather than trying to prevent
yourself from doing it,
the next time you do
it, add in a new chord
or sequence that you're trying to learn.
What this does then is it
changes the whole nature
of the sequence of neurons
that are firing from bad habit
through to the end of this
newly applied good habit.
So, this is the way in which
you start to dismantle or,
when I say dismantle,
really weaken the likelihood
that if neuron A fires,
neuron B will fire.
Because, as you're
starting off in the mode
of very reflexively
performing a bad habit,
those neurons are firing together
without you consciously being aware of it.
It's almost impossible for
you to intervene in yourself
without a number of other features,
like severe punishment, severe
consequence type outcomes.
Rather, tacking on some
additional sequences,
like if neuron A, neuron B
fires, and then you're saying,
"Okay well, if neuron B fires,"
"I'm going to start inserting
neuron C, D, E, F to fire."
Right? That's the, C, D, E,
F being the positive behavior
that you're going to insert.
And in doing so, you create a
chain of neuronal activation
that then is very easy to dismantle.
And so, when people have
applied this kind of approach,
it removes the need to have
constant conscious awareness
of one's own behavior
prior to that behavior,
which is very, very difficult to achieve.
Rather, what they find is
that they are able to engage
in re-mapping of neural circuits
associated with bad habits
in ways that are very,
very straightforward.
Right? Because you can always identify
when you've done the
thing you don't want to do
and then tack on to that
something additional
that's positive.
Now, the nature of that
positive thing is important.
You don't want it to be something
that's very hard to execute.
You want it to be
something that's positive
and fairly easy to execute,
so that you're not struggling all the time
to insert this on top
of this bad behavior,
whatever that bad behavior
might happen to be.
But again,
this is rooted in the biology
of long term depression,
it maps very well to the
behavioral change literature
that I was able to glean that really shows
that rather than just get reminders,
rather than try and instill punishment,
rather than setting up reward
for breaking bad habits,
that perhaps the simplest
way to approach this is
to tack on additional
behaviors to the bad habits,
make sure those behaviors
are good behaviors,
or behaviors that are adaptive for you,
and in doing so, you will soon find
that the initiation of the bad habit
takes on a whole new form
or that you're not even
inspired to do it at all.
And of course, I want to acknowledge
that breaking bad habits is really hard.
We had an episode all about addiction
with Dr. Anna Lembke from
Stanford Medical School.
She's a colleague of mine
who runs the Dual-Diagnosis
Addiction Clinic at Stanford.
And in that episode, we
talked a lot about how addicts
for drugs, alcohol, people have addictions
to certain types of behaviors,
or avoidance behaviors even,
that in the case of addiction,
there has to be a tremendous
kind of full-scale campaign
for them to be able to
intervene in their behavior.
So, for those of you
that are thinking about bad habit breaking
in the context of
addictive type behaviors,
definitely check out that episode.
Addiction does employ
some of these principles
around habit making and
habit breaking, as it were,
but of course, because the consequences
of certain habits in
addiction can be so severe,
there's other sets of protocols
and there's a kind of a
psychological backdrop to it
that's very important.
It also relates to the
biology of dopamine,
and you can find all
of that in the episode
with Dr. Anna Lembke.
So today we've covered
a lot about the biology
and the psychology of habit formation
and habit breaking.
We talked about why certain
habits are so hard to wire in,
why certain habits are
so hard to break down
and eliminate, and how we can determine
which habits are going to
be easier for us to access
and which habits are going to be harder
for us to access and break.
We talked a lot about this
notion of limbic friction
and we talked about context dependence.
And we talked about a
number of different things
as it relates to neural circuits
and the formation of new
connections in the brain,
and strengthening and weakening
of connections in the brain.
We also discussed two programs.
Programs designed specifically for you
on the basis of the
neurobiology literature
and the literature on the
psychology of habit formation
and habit breaking.
Just to briefly recap,
one program involves
dividing the 24 hour day
into three phases, phase
one, phase two, phase three,
and to try and tackle specific habits
at particular phases of the 24 hour cycle.
The second program
involved a 21 day process
of engaging approximately
6 new habits per day,
although the expectation,
as I mentioned earlier,
is that you're not going
to perform all 6 of those.
And an assessment in the following 21 days
as to whether or not you have
indeed formed those new habits
or not.
And there were a number of other features
that I mentioned that were related
to those two general programs.
Phase one, phase two, phase
three, and the 21 day program,
and how those could be meshed together.
So, I'm guessing some of you
will probably have questions
about those programs
and how to apply them,
but hopefully they were clear
enough for you to get started.
This is a good opportunity
for me to mention
that the Huberman Lab Podcast
has something called the
Neural Network Newsletter
that is sent out
approximately once a month.
For the next newsletter,
I will release a on-paper
version of these two systems
and how they mesh together
for habit formation
and habit breaking, and if
you'd like to access that,
you can go to hubermanlab.com,
you go to the menu,
you can sign up for the newsletter.
First of all, it's zero cost.
Second of all, we have
our privacy policy there,
but I can tell you right now,
we don't share your email with any vendors
or with any other sources.
Those emails stay internal to us.
And if you'd like to see
what the sort of flavor
of those newsletters is,
the previous newsletters, for instance,
one on tools for sleep,
that I mentioned earlier,
or tools for neuroplasticity,
in the classroom
and outside the classroom as well,
for teachers and for
students of various kinds,
those are also posted there
so you can access any of
the previous newsletters.
My hope is that today you've learned
both the biological mechanisms
and the practical tools
by which you can start
to establish habits that, for you,
you deem adaptive, healthy,
and that are going to
support you in your goals.
And that you can start to
dismantle some of the habits
that you find to be
unhealthy or maladaptive
for you and for your goals.
If you're learning from
and/or enjoying this podcast,
please subscribe to our YouTube channel.
That's a terrific way to support us.
In addition,
on YouTube you can leave us
feedback in the comment section.
You can also leave us
suggestions for future guests
that you'd like us to host
on the Huberman Lab Podcast.
And please also subscribe
to the podcast on Apple
and/or Spotify.
On Apple, you can leave
us up to a 5 star review.
And now Spotify has a feature
by which you can also
leave us review feedback.
Please also check out
the sponsors mentioned
at the beginning of this podcast episode.
That's perhaps the best
way to support out podcast.
In addition, we have a Patreon.
It's patreon.com/andrewhuberman,
and there you can support the podcast
at any level that you like.
During today's podcast
and in many previous episodes
of the Huberman Lab Podcast,
I mentioned supplements.
While supplements aren't
necessary for everybody,
many people derive tremendous
benefit from supplements.
Supplements for sleep,
supplements for focus,
supplements for various other things
related to mental and physical
health and performance.
One key issue any time
there's a discussion
about supplements, you have to be sure
that the supplements you are taking
are of the very highest quality.
And for that reason, we've
partnered with Thorne,
because Thorne has the
very highest stringency,
with respect to the quality of
the ingredients they include,
and the precision of the
amounts of the ingredients
that they include in their supplements.
If you'd like to see the
supplements that I take,
and get 20% off any of those supplements,
you can go to Thorne,
thorne.com/u/huberman and,
in addition to being able 20%
off any of those supplements,
if you navigate deeper
into the Thorne site
through that web portal,
thorne.com/u/huberman,
you can also get 20% off
any of the other supplements
that Thorne makes.
If you're not already
following us on Instagram
and Twitter, please feel free to do so.
There, I teach neuroscience
and neuroscience related tools
in short format.
Some of that material overlaps
with what you hear on the podcast,
some of it is unique and different
from what's on the podcast.
And once again,
I want to thank you for
going on this journey
of exploring the neuroscience
and the psychology of habit
formation and habit breaking.
I hope it supports you in your goals.
And last but certainly not least,
thank you for your interest in science.
[mellow music]